# Conclusion
The advent of big data and machine learning has contributed to the growth of many fields. In this study, machine learning was used in the field of genomics and bioinformatics, particularly on the concept of the minimum set of genes. Multiple machine learning algorithms (Naive Bayes, Random Forest, Artificial Neural Network) were used to model the relationship between bacterial validity and genes. Training using data from COG annotated gene sequences, the models were able to classify the validity of a given bacterium based only on its genes. The models show promising predictive power (Naive Bayes Classifier=0.80, Random Forest Classifier=0.78, and Artificial Neural Network=0.87). Each model is then subjected to feature extraction to describe a its own interpretation of the minimum set of genes. Each of the models' set of genes are compared the CEG databases set of essential genes. The results show that even though the Naive Bayes Classifier does not have the most predictive power, it is able to perform best in the set comparisons between the CEG database. In particular it was the best model in classifying which genes are non-essential (Jaccard index of 0.0058 when compared to CEG set of nonessential genes)

As a recommendation, future studies could focus on selecting more robust methods in extracting feature importance. This especially applies to the extraction of feature importance in a neural network model. At the time of writing this paper, there is still no widespread consensus as to which feature extraction method is best in neural network models.
In the future when there is one, the study of minimum set of genes will surely benefit from it.
It is also advisable for future studies to include other families of classifiers like SVM, KNN or maybe unsupervised algorithms like K means clustering.

In conclusion, this study answers the research question formulated in chapter 3: “Are these machine learning classifiers a valid tool for determining the minimal set of genes?”. After considering the results of each machine learning algorithm, the hypothesis discussed from chapter 3 is accepted. The study shows that there is good promise in the application of machine learning in the study of the minimum set of genes. The study on the minimum set of genes has been an open problem ever since the emergence of the field of genomics. This study is the first of kind in the sense that this was the first attempt in applying machine learning algorithms to model the minimum set of genes. Research on the field of bio-informatics and machine learning are still emerging, in the future when data is more abundant and tools are more advanced, this study would be a good framework for more large-scale and in depth studies.
